ovaHRDscar R package manual
========================

-   [Introduction](#introduction)
    -   [Contact](#contact)
-   [Before to use it](#before-to-use-it)
    -   [Requirements](#requirements)
    -   [Installation](#installation)
    -   [Citation](#citation)
-   [Hands-on](#hands-on)
    -   [Input file example](#input-file-example)
    -   [Usage example](#usage-example)
-   [References](#references)

Introduction
============

R package to quantify allelic imbalances associated with homologous recombination deficiency in ovarian cancer. Use as input a list of segments per samples as those generated by ASCAT. Have fun with it!

The allelic imbalances quantified by this package are:

1. LOH events bigger than 10Mb but smaller than 50Mb
2. Large scale transitions (LSTs): Two consecutive allelic imbalances of at least 12Mb, with a separition between then no more than 1Mb
3. Telomeric allelic imbalances: Allelic imbalances that extend up to the telomere but do not cross the centromer.

The total number of the previous allelic imbalances are the resultant ovaHRDscar value.

Contact
------------
- Fernando Perez-Villatoro (fernando.perez@helsinki.fi)


Before to use it
============

Requirements
-----------------
- Installation of R in any Operating system: Linux, OS X or Windows
- R recomended version 4.3.0
- R package `devtools`:
``` r
install.packages("devtools")
```

Installation
------------

The  `ovaHRDscar` can be installed via R::`devtools` from github:

``` r
library(devtools)
install_github('farkkilab/ovaHRDscar')
```

Citation
--------

Please include this citation to your references if you use this tool:

*Perez-Villatoro, F., Oikkonen, J., Casado, J., Chernenko, A., Gulhan, D. C., Tumiati, M., ... & Färkkilä, A. (2022). Optimized detection of homologous recombination deficiency improves the prediction of clinical outcomes in cancer. NPJ precision oncology, 6(1), 96.*
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41698-022-00339-8

Hands-on
=================

Input file example
-------------------
The input is a list of allele specific copy number (ASCN) segments generated by tools like [ASCAT](https://www.crick.ac.uk/research/labs/peter-van-loo/software). Example of input file:



``` r
a<-read.table("/examples/segments.txt", header=T)
head(a)
```

    ##         SampleID Chromosome Start_position End_position total_cn A_cn B_cn
    ## 1 SamplePatient1       chr1          14574       952448        5    0    5
    ## 2 SamplePatient1       chr1         953394      1259701        3    0    3
    ## 3 SamplePatient1       chr1        1278085      4551743        2    0    2
    ## 4 SamplePatient1       chr1        4551885     14124232        2    0    2
    ## 5 SamplePatient1       chr1       14161231     31062374        3    1    2
    ## 6 SamplePatient1       chr1       31074785     47428120        4    2    2

The input list should contain columns with the previous order. Each row represent a ASCN segment. It is not necessary to keep a proper row order.  

Column  description:

- `A_cn`: A allele copy number value

- `B_cn`: B allele  copy number value

- `total_cn`: Sum of A and B values

**Note: For each segment, the package will re-order the A and B copy number values, considering as A the one with highest ASCN.*

Usage example
-------------
Get the number of allelic imbalances associated with HRD in ovarian cancer with the function `get.ovaHRDscar`:
``` r
library("ovaHRDscar")
a <-read.table("/examples/segments.txt", header=T)
get.ovaHRDscars(a, chrominfo ="grch38")
```

After running it will produce the next output:

    ##           nLOH LSTs nTAIs ovaHRDscar
    ## SamplePatient1  25  35    33        93


Ruing parameters:
- `seg` -- Input dataframe with segments  
- `chrominfo` -- the reference genome used, `grch38` or `grch37` (default: `grch38`)  

References
==========

*Some of the functions used are adaptations of the package scarHRD (https://github.com/sztup/scarHRD).* 

